JWT client authentication (RFC 7523)
====================================

`RFC 7523 <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7523.html>`_ (building on the assertion framework of
`RFC 7521 <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7521.html>`_) lets a client authenticate to the
authorization server with a signed JWT — a *client assertion* — instead of a client secret. Copies
of both specs are vendored at ``rfcs/rfc7523.txt`` and ``rfcs/rfc7521.txt``.

django-oauth-toolkit implements the two methods OpenID Connect names for this:

``private_key_jwt``
    The client signs the assertion with its own private key (RS/ES/PS algorithms) and registers the
    matching public keys with the server, either as an inline JWK Set or as a ``jwks_uri`` the
    server fetches. The client's secret plays no role, so nothing bearer-like crosses the wire.

``client_secret_jwt``
    The client signs the assertion with an HMAC (HS algorithms) keyed by the client secret. Both
    sides must know the plaintext secret, so — exactly like ``HS256`` ID-token signing — the secret
    must be stored unhashed (``hash_client_secret=False``). Prefer ``private_key_jwt`` where you
    can.

The client posts two extra form parameters instead of its secret::

    client_assertion_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-bearer
    client_assertion=<signed JWT>

Assertions are accepted wherever the client authenticates: the token endpoint, the introspection
endpoint and the revocation endpoint.

.. note::
   Only RFC 7523 *client authentication* (section 2.2) is implemented. The authorization grant
   ``urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer`` (section 2.1) is not supported.

Registering a client
--------------------

Set the application's ``token_endpoint_auth_method`` — in the Django admin, via your own
provisioning code, or through :doc:`Dynamic Client Registration <views/dynamic_client_registration>`
if enabled. JWT methods are
strictly opt-in per client and fail closed in both directions:

* an application whose ``token_endpoint_auth_method`` is blank (the default) or a secret-based
  method **cannot** authenticate with an assertion, and
* an application registered for a JWT method **cannot** authenticate with its secret anymore
  (`RFC 9700 <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9700.html>`_ section 2.5) — a leaked secret must
  not open a weaker side door.

For ``private_key_jwt``, register the client's public keys on the application:

``client_jwks``
    An inline JWK Set (RFC 7517), e.g. ``{"keys": [{"kty": "EC", "crv": "P-256", ...}]}``.
    Public keys only — the server never needs (and refuses to store) private key material.

``client_jwks_uri``
    An ``https`` URL serving the client's JWK Set. The server fetches it with the same SSRF
    hardening used for :doc:`CIMD <cimd>` (public-IP validation and pinning, no redirects, size and
    timeout caps) and caches it for ``CLIENT_ASSERTION_JWKS_CACHE_TIMEOUT`` seconds. When an
    assertion arrives with an unknown ``kid``, the set is re-fetched once — so key rotation works
    without manual intervention — and fetch failures back off for
    ``CLIENT_ASSERTION_JWKS_FAILURE_BACKOFF_SECONDS``.

The two fields are mutually exclusive. Both are validated by ``Application.clean()``.

Dynamic Client Registration accepts ``token_endpoint_auth_method`` values ``private_key_jwt`` (with
``jwks`` or ``jwks_uri`` metadata) and ``client_secret_jwt``; a ``client_secret_jwt`` registration
stores its secret unhashed and returns it in the response, while a ``private_key_jwt`` registration
receives no ``client_secret`` at all.

What the server validates
-------------------------

Each assertion is checked per RFC 7523 section 3 before the client is authenticated. All checks
fail closed and any failure surfaces to the client as a plain ``invalid_client`` error:

* ``client_assertion_type`` must be exactly the jwt-bearer URN, and no second authentication
  method (Basic header or ``client_secret`` parameter) may accompany the assertion.
* ``iss`` and ``sub`` must both equal the ``client_id`` of a registered application whose
  ``token_endpoint_auth_method`` is the matching JWT method.
* The JWS ``alg`` must be in the per-method allowlist (``CLIENT_ASSERTION_PRIVATE_KEY_JWT_ALGS`` /
  ``CLIENT_ASSERTION_CLIENT_SECRET_JWT_ALGS``); ``none`` is structurally impossible.
* The signature must verify against the registered key material (``kid`` selects the key when
  present).
* ``exp`` is required, bounded by ``CLIENT_ASSERTION_MAX_LIFETIME``, and ``nbf``/``iat`` must not
  lie in the future; all time checks tolerate ``CLIENT_ASSERTION_LEEWAY`` seconds of skew.
* ``aud`` must identify this server (see below).
* ``jti`` is required and remembered until the assertion expires: a replayed assertion is
  rejected.

.. warning::
   Replay protection stores seen ``jti`` values in the *default Django cache*. With the local-memory
   cache backend each process keeps its own memory, so a replayed assertion could be accepted by a
   different worker. Multi-instance deployments must configure a shared cache backend (Redis,
   Memcached, database) for cross-instance replay protection.

Audiences and reverse proxies
-----------------------------

By default the server accepts an ``aud`` naming either its OIDC issuer (``OIDC_ISS_ENDPOINT`` or the
request-derived issuer) or the exact URL of the endpoint the assertion was posted to (trailing
slashes are ignored). The request-derived URL is built from the ``Host`` header, so behind a
reverse proxy make sure Django sees the external host (``USE_X_FORWARDED_HOST``,
``SECURE_PROXY_SSL_HEADER``).

When the externally visible URL cannot be derived — a path-rewriting proxy, multiple public
hostnames — set ``CLIENT_ASSERTION_ACCEPTED_AUDIENCES`` explicitly; when set, that list is the only
accepted audience set:

.. code-block:: python

    OAUTH2_PROVIDER = {
        "CLIENT_ASSERTION_ACCEPTED_AUDIENCES": [
            "https://id.example.com",
            "https://id.example.com/o/token/",
        ],
    }

Advertising the methods
-----------------------

The defaults of ``OIDC_TOKEN_ENDPOINT_AUTH_METHODS_SUPPORTED`` and
``OAUTH2_TOKEN_ENDPOINT_AUTH_METHODS_SUPPORTED`` are unchanged, so discovery documents do not
advertise JWT methods until you opt in:

.. code-block:: python

    OAUTH2_PROVIDER = {
        "OIDC_TOKEN_ENDPOINT_AUTH_METHODS_SUPPORTED": [
            "client_secret_post",
            "client_secret_basic",
            "private_key_jwt",
            "client_secret_jwt",
        ],
        "OAUTH2_TOKEN_ENDPOINT_AUTH_METHODS_SUPPORTED": [
            "client_secret_post",
            "client_secret_basic",
            "private_key_jwt",
            "client_secret_jwt",
        ],
    }

Once a JWT method is advertised, the OIDC discovery and RFC 8414 metadata documents automatically
include the matching ``*_auth_signing_alg_values_supported`` values.

Acting as the client (RP side)
------------------------------

For Django applications on the *other* side of the exchange — authenticating to some remote
authorization server — :func:`oauth2_provider.client_assertions.make_client_assertion` builds a
correctly shaped assertion. It accepts a ``jwcrypto.jwk.JWK``, a private-key PEM string, a JWK JSON
string, or (for HS algorithms) the raw client secret, and generates a fresh ``jti`` per call:

.. code-block:: python

    import requests
    from oauth2_provider.client_assertions import (
        JWT_BEARER_CLIENT_ASSERTION_TYPE,
        make_client_assertion,
    )

    assertion = make_client_assertion(
        client_id="my-client-id",
        key=PRIVATE_KEY_PEM,                  # or a jwk.JWK / JWK JSON string
        audience="https://as.example.com",    # the AS issuer or token endpoint URL
    )
    response = requests.post(
        "https://as.example.com/o/token/",
        data={
            "grant_type": "client_credentials",
            "client_assertion_type": JWT_BEARER_CLIENT_ASSERTION_TYPE,
            "client_assertion": assertion,
        },
    )

Build a new assertion for every request instead of reusing one: servers (including this one) reject
replayed ``jti`` values.

A resource server that validates tokens against a remote introspection endpoint can likewise
authenticate to that endpoint with ``private_key_jwt`` — see :doc:`resource_server`.

Settings
--------

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_LEEWAY`` (default ``60``)
    Seconds of clock skew tolerated when checking ``exp``, ``nbf`` and ``iat``.

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_MAX_LIFETIME`` (default ``300``)
    Assertions whose ``exp`` lies further in the future than this are rejected. RFC 7523 tells
    servers to reject unreasonably long-lived assertions; the bound also caps how long the ``jti``
    replay cache must remember each assertion.

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_ACCEPTED_AUDIENCES`` (default ``None``)
    Explicit list of accepted ``aud`` values. When ``None`` the accepted set is derived from the
    OIDC issuer and the URL of the endpoint the assertion was posted to. Any configured list is
    authoritative — an empty list rejects every audience rather than falling back to derivation.

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_PRIVATE_KEY_JWT_ALGS`` (default: the RS/ES/PS algorithms)
    JWS algorithms accepted for ``private_key_jwt`` assertions.

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_CLIENT_SECRET_JWT_ALGS`` (default ``["HS256", "HS384", "HS512"]``)
    JWS algorithms accepted for ``client_secret_jwt`` assertions.

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_JWKS_CACHE_TIMEOUT`` (default ``3600``)
    Seconds a fetched ``client_jwks_uri`` document is cached (in the default Django cache).

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_JWKS_FETCH_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`` (default ``5``)
    Total time budget for one JWK Set fetch, shared across all addresses the host resolves to.

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_JWKS_MAX_SIZE`` (default ``65536``)
    Maximum size in bytes of a fetched JWK Set document.

``CLIENT_ASSERTION_JWKS_FAILURE_BACKOFF_SECONDS`` (default ``60``)
    After a failed fetch, no re-fetch of that URL is attempted for this long.

The resource-server settings (``RESOURCE_SERVER_INTROSPECTION_JWT_*``) are documented in
:doc:`settings`.
